greetings ladies and gentlemens losla
montgomery again
thankful and appreciative as ever that
you're tuning in to the china history
podcast we're back with part two of this
little
set course meal overview of the history
of the jews who found refuge in china
particularly in the first half of the
20th century
i know part one was a little heavy on
the appetizers i assure you there will
be
more flanking in this episode last time
we looked at the har being jewish
community in china and how
so many jews ended up there now these
russian jews came to escape the
persecution during the many pogroms and
also during the
building of the china eastern railway
these events
busted things wide open at the start of
the 20th century and turned harbin from
an obscure fishing village of no great
consequence
to the most important city in all of
manchuria
jews also came to harbin as demobilized
soldiers who fought in the
russo-japanese war
then later in 1917 these
russian and ukrainian jews along with
their occasional tormentors the
white russians also came in great
numbers in the wake of the bolshevik
revolution
they not only went to harbin these
russians
also ended up on mass in the french
concession in shanghai
and as i mentioned this community of
jews up in the city of harbin was a good
30 000 strong at its peak around 1930
in a common theme throughout the period
where
jews live side by side with the local
chinese
they seem to get unswell before we
jump into the episode i wanted to
mention something just just an anecdote
from history but certainly
relevant to what we talked about last
time back in 1903
just when the china eastern railway
began service
the new york chinatown community through
a charity event to raise money for the
jewish victims of the kishnev programs
now kishnev used to be a metaphor where
i grew up for
some place out in the middle of nowhere
well today
it's the capital of the republic of
moldova but back in 1903 it was the
scene of one of the more
vicious pogroms carried out against the
jewish inhabitants living there
inside the russian empire it got quite a
bit of press in the us
and the new york chinatown fathers upon
reading about what happened all put
their heads together and decided to do
something to create some awareness
and extend a hand of friendship and
solidarity to the new york jewish
community
one of the chinese locals a man named
joseph singleton
in the name of the chinese empire reform
association
approached members of the jewish
community about throwing a benefit
performance at the chinese theater
followed up by a dinner at the chinese
del monaco's
24 pell street there's a big joint in
its day
this is all in new york chinatown joseph
singleton's chinese name was zhaowan
chang
very interesting figure from the early
days of new york chinatown history scott
seligman
wrote a piece in the september 2011
china heritage quarterly
put out by anu australia national
university
it was called the night new york's
chinese went out for the jews
it was a fun evening chinese performers
all donated their services and leaders
from both
communities gave speeches and solidarity
denouncing the persecution going on in
russia
as well as speaking to the shared
suffering the jews and chinese have had
in the past
and the jewish press had always spoken
out against chinese exclusion
which was the law of the land at the
time anyway it was a nice evening for
the two communities who of course knew
of each other but
didn't mix too often if at all and they
raised almost 300 bucks for the kishnev
jews and i'm sure
everyone knew it was the thought that
counts so anyway i wanted to mention
this i'll have a link to
uh scott seligman's article in the show
notes sounded like a hell of a night
anyway in part two we're gonna relive
that history
you're all probably quite familiar with
especially if you're
nearing my advanced age this is the lead
up to world war
ii those years in the 1930s
let's get started with today's story and
take it as far as we can within the
a lot of time limit of course after the
mukden incident
9 18 31 and the shake up in manchuria
caused by japan's aggression up there
including the establishment of manchu in
the wonderful and rich life the jewish
refugees built for themselves
that thrived throughout the 1920s and
harbin
started to wind down the drums of war
were just starting to slowly
slowly beat and it was time to leave
this
rich and refined world they had built
and
find a less hostile place if it existed
now not everyone left but most did
and though many went to shanghai many
also left china all together including
to palestine
a lot went there and this is gonna cause
all kinds of problems later on with the
uh local inhabitants
a good number of harbingers however
headed 1200 kilometers to the southwest
in the direction of tianjin as far
as the story of the tianjin jews
the first ones were the safaridim the
jews of spain
north africa and the middle east also
known as the mizrahi jews
like their fellow baghdadi jews down in
shanghai like the sassoons
these jews came to tianjin right after
the opium war
the sassoons came after the first opium
war and the first
tianjin jews came after the 1858 treaty
of tianjin
following the second opium war now this
treaty
turned tinjin into one of the new
11 treaty ports open for business that
tianjin
is just a little bit east of beijing and
even today is one of the major
seaports of north china aside from these
baghdadi traders
as far as any significant jewish
presence went
tianjin didn't really start to take off
until the 1920s
the safaridim comprised the first wave
of jews to tianjin
the major growth began with the second
wave who all came from russia
they either came to tianjin via harbin
in the early 1930s
or came directly from russia for the
same basket of reasons that chased the
jews to harbin
the tianjin community didn't even start
to build a synagogue until the 1930s
not that the majority of the tianjin
jews were regular attendees but you know
for the high holidays at least the the
community always came together at some
rented venue somewhere in one of the
eight foreign concessions as with little
moscow
up in harbin the jews of tianjin had
their own little jewish town
it was the jewish version of any
chinatown anywhere in the world
complete with a benevolent association
it was called the tianjin hebrew
association
established in 1905 and duly registered
with the
russian imperial consulate throughout
the years of the jewish
presence in tianjin the board of this
institution
and the respected elders of the
community would see to the needs of the
refugees and other jewish residents of
tianjin
names like gershovich and zandovic were
the
were the sassoons and kaduris of tianjin
and not necessarily in wealth
but in influence leadership and
participation within the community
and the jewish kunst or arts club became
another
organization that brought the community
together and became sort of a
a center for everything a lot of get
togethers happen there
there are so many photos taken that
survive and the best joint to go grab a
bite in tianjin was the victoria cafe
and with the concentration of educated
and professional residents like it was
the town was full of jewish-run
newspapers and journals
they made a life for themselves there
the tianjin jewish community received
its biggest boost in residence
after the bolsheviks came to power the
population grew to
over 600 families up from the 10 that
made up the community back in 1904
israel epstein whose incredible life was
covered in chp episode four famous
westerners interred at babaushan
cemetery
was one of these tianjin jews now
historically
israel epstein was perhaps the best
known of these jewish residents of
tianjin
he arrived with his family from warsaw
in 1920.
he too got chased out of poland for
similar reasons as
others of his kind tianjin jews
tended to concentrate in the fur and
leather trade there
the city had become a major trading port
for the fur industry
there was a very brisk trade in these
manchurian furs and animal skins going
on between tianjin
and leipzig and new york they have the
same
vigorous zionist organizations down in
tianjin as they had up in harbin
and all throughout this period there
were many jews there who were
resettled in palestine you know all of
this history that happened in tianjin
thankfully 1920s and 30s 90 years ago
and it wasn't like the tang dynasty such
a
great amount of material has survived
that
chronicled this world the jewish
refugees created for themselves
many of these former tianjin residents
baruch hashem are still living
and have written books and documented
their stories
there are a lot of photos and public
and private collections that chronicles
the tianjin jewish community during this
period
the community peaked in 1935
with about 3 500 jewish residents
and the most amazing thing i guess that
i took away from reading all the books
and
looking at the pictures was how normal
everything looked i mean you've got to
admit this is pretty extraordinary whole
families being
uprooted and coming to this unlikely
part of the world
i mean for an ashkenazi jew anyway and
not only making a life there but
bringing their whole jewish russian
and european culture along for the ride
and getting it all
recreated in tianjin or harbin or
shanghai wherever they went
this is what they did the jews after
they got settled in china
now i'm only mentioning her being
tianjin and
shanghai there were others as well
including in hong kong
in each place the jewish residents
banded together
and used everything their
yiddisha culture and upbringing had
taught them
up to that point to truly make the best
of a bad situation
amidst all the 1930s history we all know
about
in their small communities in these big
cities in china
the jewish people still produced
literature theater
and art and well this kept the heart
beating
all throughout this period and children
were born there and grew up
and had from the photos at least about
as normal a life as any expat kid
i mean looking at the photos unless you
saw chinese writing
or people in the background you'd hardly
know they were in china
they went to jewish and non-jewish
schools played
organized sports and engaged in all
manners of social activities and
clubs and not just the kids the adults
and
elderly as well and since tianjin was so
close to beit
that famous getaway spot of today's ccp
top leaders
that too became a special place for
tianjin families to vacation
at many of the buildings and landmarks
where this
jewish community once thrived are still
there
many of the former residents have come
back as tourists
to visit tianjin and they had the chance
to reminisce
and even see old chinese friends who
welcomed them in the 1930s and 40s and
who
were their friends 80 and 90 years ago
up to now we've mainly focused on acts 1
and 2 in the
history of the jewish refugees in china
act 1
in the modern history of the jews in
china began with the sfardim who
mainly came from iraq by way of india
and became part of the elites
in the foreign establishment act two
involved the russian jews and everything
they created up in harbin and tengen
if i may i'd like to move on to act
three
maybe this is the history you're more
familiar with because it concerns
the european jews hitler the nazis and
world war ii this is where the numbers
of jews fleeing to china starts to swell
and the stories of survival get a little
bit more dramatic
as we continue on with our overview of
the jewish refugees in china
we can also revisit all the well-known
milestones that led up to the invasion
of poland
9 1 1939
if i had to choose one milestone in
particular that really got the ball
rolling
it'd have to be in january 1933 when
hitler became chancellor
now hitler hadn't become hitler yet but
with his
accession to the chancellorship the more
astute of germany's half million or so
jews
knew they had a problem on their hands
by march 1933
couple months later heinrich himmler was
already putting the finishing touches on
his
pride and joy over in dachau the next
month
saw the first of many laws passed
directed against non-aryans
a new code name for the jews in july
still in the year 1933 with the
wealthier jews already starting to leave
germany instituted the
reichfluster the taxes for fleeing the
reich
a handy way to shake down jews on their
way out the door
and pretty much for the rest of the year
using the
precision and efficiency the germans are
renowned for
the jews through all kinds of
regulations and being hated on by the
local populace
began to become isolated in their own
country
nazi propaganda was omnipresent
lenny riffenstahl's triumph for the will
was 1935
berlin olympics 1936. you've seen the
pictures
all the work that came out regarding
race science and the superiority of one
race over another that was all happening
too over in america but we were still in
fdr's first term and still
reeling from the depression hangover we
had our own problems
from the moment hitler came to power
german jews were
powerless to stop anyone from
confiscating their property
laws and regulations would be announced
that directly or indirectly deprived
them of
earning a livelihood and men were just
now starting to be taken away
locked up in camps as early as november
of 1933
the first of many german jews arrived as
refugees
in shanghai only about 26 families
they did well getting out as early as
they did many among these early arrivals
were professionals
and educated and thereby able to start a
new life rather quickly
many also got out early and took the
trans-siberian railway to manchukuo
and found refuge in harbin as our
story unfolds we see the next 30
000 or so to follow in the direction of
shanghai will have a little bit rougher
of a voyage than
those who preceded them then
in november 1935 came the nuremberg laws
and that further exacerbated the jews
isolation
and two years into hitler's
chancellorship the german jews and
others were looking around and wondering
when was this madness gonna end when
were people gonna
see through all this propaganda bombast
and
lies of this regime and wake up from
this insanity
well little did they know it was only
just getting started
1936 1937 was
relative calm before the storm that
1938 ended up being for european jews
march 1938 the ancelots germany annexed
austria
the 200 000 or so jews who called that
place home were targeted for the same
persecution that
germany's jews were going through
austrian jews they had to pick up and
leave also
and to china many of them went
august through november 1937
was the horrific and bloody battle of
shanghai
things were already quite tense in china
since the marco polo bridge incident a
month before
but once the japanese vessel itsumo was
bombed on august 14th
the second sino-japanese war began with
consequences that affected everyone
everywhere in china
jewish refugees included the battle of
shanghai
made it to all the newsreels and all the
major cities of the world
so everyone knew and wasn't a safe place
by the looks of the bombed out buildings
and who could forget the iconic grainy
black and white image of the crying baby
all by itself
amidst the rubble the story of the
jewish refugees in shanghai
can't be told without a mention about
the chinese refugees of shanghai
when japan unleashed the full fury of
their military might on the good people
up and down the yanza river
a lot of inhabitants of these towns and
jo jiang and
jiangsu look to shanghai as the safest
place to wait out the worst of what was
happening
with all those foreigners there and
chinese military presence
they figured they'd be safe in shanghai
and so that's where a lot of chinese
headed
and not just poor villagers either
industrialists as well
they packed up their old factories and
moved it all to shanghai
so in mentioning about the jewish and
other refugees fleeing to shanghai
they weren't alone the chinese refugees
in shanghai
their numbers were the greatest as was
the
extent of their misery and suffering so
after
december 1937 was out of the way and all
that
horrific blood was spilled and the rape
of nanjing had already happened
the japanese had a four year period
between this moment and when they bombed
pearl harbor december 7th 1941.
this was the period of undeclared war in
china
my podcasting brother ray harris jr
is covering this event now in his
history of world war ii podcast if i
may humbly recommend that very popular
show the pacific war
just underway so as 1937
turned to 1938 in shanghai
a whole interrelated dynamic emerged
where
no one was really in charge i mean japan
was clearly the most potent
military presence in shanghai but they
didn't control the whole city
or the levers of government they took
over parts of the city
i mean most notably the hong kong
district parts of which became
known as little tokyo a
chinese-administered bureaucracy was put
in place to handle basic services but
they now worked for the japanese
remember at this stage of the game
germany and china
i still had friendly relations purchase
orders from the chinese military
for german armaments were and had been
for years
very substantial like it is with weapon
sales
nobody on either side wanted to mess
with something that was
very important to both parties as the
countdown to 1941
gets closer the germany-china
relationship gets
more complicated for now everybody's
neutral
the most interesting thing as far as our
story is concerned is that passport
controls
under these conditions sort of broke
down
nobody was checking anything which meant
for any jew
looking to escape from europe if worse
came to worst
this could be an option desperate and
unpleasant as it was
surely in the eyes of many a european
but if one was stateless
in the case of these german and austrian
jews and this crazy idea wasn't so crazy
by 1937 the exodus of jews from europe
was
really starting to become an
inconvenience for many nations
how to deal with all these jews vacating
germany and austria
and not just those two countries
hungarian and romanian jews too were
also on the run
the same or similar policies being meted
out on
german and austrian jews were also
happening in central europe as well
yeah those were not easy years for
everyone caught up in the history
happening all around them
what to do by 1937 everyone who counted
themselves
personally part of the jewish problem as
it was called
in official circles had to pick out a
place to flee to
comparatively speaking it was easier to
get out of germany before 1937.
those who opted out early got to leave
with a
good portion of their wealth and moved
on to wherever
away from germany and austria although
there were
european jews already heading to china
they weren't coming in droves
not yet 1938 is going to change all that
and it's going to be in 1938 that we
pick up next time
yeah i'm cutting it a little short but i
got news for you
all the heads of all the different
departments the investors and others who
have a stakeholding in the chp
came out with a pronouncement that said
starting with this episode
they demand at least two shows per month
and if i have to decrease the portions
so be it well i'm a company man so
that's the way it's going to be from
here on out until kingdom come
when i was at sound education a couple
weekends ago
i fell in with a swell bunch of folks at
himalaya
chinese speakers know their shimalaya fm
app almost half a billion users
it's sort of the podcast app of china i
guess you could say it's mostly chinese
content
in fact i think all of it is but they
have an international version of the app
and it's called himalaya
and they got a team up in san francisco
that seems pretty determined to make
this the app of apps
for podcast listening i started
using it on the flight back to la after
the conference and i
haven't looked back i never did like
apple's podcast app so now i'm using
himalaya it's a free download
go check it out available in ios and
android flavors
subscribe to all your favorite shows
just like you do anywhere else
himalaya hello gold mountain
we're getting closer i mentioned this
upcoming event last episode
gulchung virtuoso and singer wufei
along with mr chennair ezra blumenkranz
and the chatterbird ensemble
will debut hello gold mountain in music
town usa
nashville tennessee in february 2019 at
ingram hall
hello gold mountain a requiem for lost
possibilities of the jewish community of
shanghai
this original composition for chamber
orchestra
still being composed by wufei as we
speak
was inspired by the actual stories of
those jewish refugees who escaped
to shanghai during world war ii that's
going to be a
great night for music and for the people
of nashville and for the
jewish and chinese communities to come
together in remembrance of their
shared history let me also mention
another nice bunch of folks to know
i went to a fabulous event not too long
ago sponsored by the ajc's
asia pacific institute ajc the american
jewish committee
they're headquartered in new york uh
with representatives in la
new delhi southeast asia tokyo and
washington dc
they work to initiate and strengthen
ties with asian and asian american
opinion leaders and decision makers
the asia pacific institute fosters
strategic alliances with governments
civil society media and business leaders
throughout asia
and raises awareness about the jewish
people and israel
like i said they put on some nice talks
and
panels on all kinds of timely topics
concerning asia
that's how i met them ajc.org if you
want to learn more
i'm still working on that donations page
i know many of you have been asking
i'm downsizing my uh expectations though
and instead of a petite
villa on lake como i'm thinking of
something more modest in the
poconos or catskills the jewish alps
we'll see how the donations go and you
know something if it has to be the
oakwood apartments
that's what it'll have to be either way
my biggest donors will all get a key to
the front door
or i'm thinking maybe a nice chp logo
key fob
when i get that donate page up you all
know what to do
not even a donation page yet but good
old long time listener jerry asks give
me a nice
bat donation already throwing large
denomination bills
into my begging bowl that'll keep the
lights on here for another month
thanks jerry all right enough of the
psas laszlo montgomery here
signing off from los angeles california
i'll be back in a couple weeks with part
three
the traumatic and frightful year of 1938
and our little
overview of the history of the jewish
refugees in china
see you next time take care everyone